This is a follow up to the previous video about logistic regression for sparse probing.
In this video I'm going to use simulated data.
So just random numbers instead of using actual data from an.
That is advantageous because it allows us to have tighter control over the nature of the data.
So there's no new math in this video, just new concepts and possibly new revelations about logistic
regression with large data sets.
So let me get straight to the overview of the demo.
I will begin by simulating data with 3000 neurons and two categories.
Now these data do not come from a language model, but you can think about something like 3000 MLP expansion
neurons and 200 tokens coming from two categories like the word the and the word n, for example.
So here you see all of the activations, and here you see the histograms of all of the activations.
So I shifted the activations for category one so that there is like a ridiculously huge effect size
in the difference between the two categories.
I will then run another sweep through different values of C, similar to what I did in the previous
state.
A video with real data.
Remember that c equals one over lambda.
So lambda is going down as we go up with values of c.
So the sparsity value values vary quite a bit depending on this parameter.
Again it's not that surprising, but it does highlight that it can be difficult to choose a particular
regularization amount given the spread we have on the outcomes.
So a question here is which neurons actually get their coefficients switched to zero, given that basically
every neuron shows a strong difference between the two categories.
How does the model know which coefficients to set to zero?
That is something we will explore in the next couple of analyses.
I will rerun the analysis for one particular value of C, and then plot the beta coefficients on the
x axis by the effect size on the y axis.
Effect size is similar to a t statistic.
I will show you the exact formula when we get to that point in the code, but it's basically the difference
in the average activation for each category divided by the pooled standard deviations over the two categories.
So each dot in this plot corresponds to one of the 3000 neurons.
You can see that those effect sizes vary from around four to around six, which is quite a decent effect
size.
But here's what's really striking.
Around half of the beta values are actually negative.
So what could that possibly mean?
If you would interpret the beta for any one given neuron, then it would mean that there is more activation
for category zero compared to category one.
But when we look back at the plots of the data and the distribution, that's just not the case.
Category one basically always has more activation than category zero.
So how can it possibly be that around half of the neurons have a negative beta value?
I would also like to draw your attention to the magnitude of these coefficients.
They are somewhere around 0.02 two ish.
Okay, so what I'm going to do next is pick two of these 3000 neurons, the one with the largest beta
value and the one with the most negative beta value.
Then I will visualize their histograms for two categories, which is what you see here.
By the way, this screenshot here is from a different run through the code than what how I got this
screenshot here.
So the numerical betas don't necessarily lined up.
The code produces slightly different results each time I run it because of random data.
Anyway, the point is that there is perfect, literally absolutely perfect separation between the activations
for the two categories, and they both go in these same in the same direction, which is both positive
for label one compared to label two.
So how can it be that the beta values are so small and one is actually Negative, even though the negative
beta and the positive beta have the same direction of effect.
Curiously, another visualization of this where I'm plotting the negative beta on the x axis and the
activations from the positive beta neuron on the y axis.
Again, perfect separability both within and at the intersection between these two neurons.
So I'm then going to rerun the logistic regression exactly the same as what gave me these results here.
Except I'm only going to use these two neurons and not all 3000 neurons.
And you will see that their coefficients change from being small and positive and negative to being
two orders of magnitude larger, and both positive.
Now that difference is due to something called statistical suppression.
Statistical suppression is a term that is used when there are a lot of variables in a statistical model,
and the variables start to suppress each other because they have redundant information.
Remember I mentioned in the previous video that for a logistic regression like this, the goal is to
predict the label.
The goal is not to interpret every individual neuron separately from every other neuron.
So when there are so many neurons and so much redundancy that the model just ends up suppressing a lot
of the activations from the neurons, simply because they're just not all relevant for predicting the
label.
So in fact, the model is learning to ignore around half of the neurons in this data set just because
it doesn't actually need to use their activation values.
Anyway, the last analysis I will run here is to see which neurons end up with zero valued coefficients.
It's actually not attributable to the amount of variability in the neuron, which is what I'm plotting
here.
So it's not the case that the least variable or the most variable neurons get shunted to have beta equals
zero.
It's also not related to group differences in correlation strength.
I don't show that figure here, but I will get to it in the code.
Anyway, so now let's switch to Python and work through this stuff.
Import some libraries.
And let's see.
Here is where I'm creating the data.
So 3000 neurons.
In fact these are just literally random numbers that I'm generating here.
But we will think of it as 3000 MLP expansion layer neurons, just for ease of, you know, linking
to the other lectures.
And we have 200 tokens.
And then what I do is so yeah here I generate all of the data.
And then what I do is, shift the data by a value of five only for the data in the first half of the
tokens.
So that means that 100 tokens will have random noise with a mean of zero and the other.
The second 100 tokens will have random noise with a mean offset of five.
So one for the label and then times five.
And then I make some histograms and the image of the data.
And that's what you see here.
So super duper clear what's going on here for every neuron.
You know, basically every neuron we see that there is relatively low activation for the first hundred
tokens.
That's category zero and much higher activation for the other neuron for the other tokens.
And that I call category one.
So if you would just take any individual neuron, any one of these 3000 neurons, it's going to be highly
significant.
The difference between the activations for category zero and for category one.
So now it's going to be interesting to see what happens with the logistic regression when we enforce
sparsity okay.
And before I do that I am running the logistic regression for different values of C.
This is basically the same as what I showed in the previous video.
But there it was for real data.
Here it's for these simulated data.
So here I'm just calculating sparsity.
This is the number of coefficients that have a value of exactly zero.
And we get that from introducing this L1 regularization term averaging that.
So this is the proportion.
And then I multiply it by 100 just to get the percent okay.
Now in this line of code in the previous video I also increased the maximum number of iterations to
1000.
Here I'm leaving it at 100, so probably would be a good idea to increase it a little bit.
But yeah, it's really not a big deal.
Okay.
And then anyway, the point that I wanted to demonstrate here is that the sparsity in a in a data set
is not necessarily a parameter that is intrinsic to the data set.
It is a parameter or a result that can vary depending on the parameter that you set.
Now it does look like it's kind of stabilizes around here.
And if you like, you can continue setting this c parameter a little bit higher to see if this really
stabilizes here.
Of course it's ultimately going to be there's a floor of zero.
You can't get sparsity less than zero.
Okay.
So this does present one of the challenges of doing sparse regression or L1 regression.
Because yeah you have to pick a parameter of C or equivalently lambda.
And the value that you pick will have a impact on the sparsity or the density that you get in your result.
Okay.
So here you can see I'm increasing the max iteration.
So now I just set C equals three.
It's kind of an arbitrary number I just picked it.
Yeah pretty arbitrarily okay.
And then yeah I'm also running through the model.
And let's see in this case I'm actually not using a separate train and test set like I did with the
previous, uh, in the previous video.
That's generally always a good idea here.
It doesn't matter, because I just want to focus on some other aspects of the logistic regression,
in particular interpreting the small beta values that can be negative in large data sets.
Okay.
So we get an accuracy of 100%.
So I could actually multiply this by 100 if you want to see it in percent.
Let me comment this and just print this out again.
So uh so the accuracy is very high.
Sparsity is around 36%.
And yeah here I just wanted to show the actual number of iterations.
So I said uh maximum number of iterations is 1000.
That doesn't necessarily mean the model will run a thousand iterations.
That means that the model will stop running through gradient descent once it gets to either a good solution
that it's happy with, or a maximum of 1000 iterations.
And in this case, it did actually stop at 1000.
Something that I forgot to mention in the previous video is that when I showed the equation in the slides
of the previous video, uh, the equation was, uh, you know, there was the beta zero term, which
is the intercept, and then there's beta one through beta k.
So beta one through beta k are the coefficients for each variable or in our case each neuron.
But that means that there should be the number of beta values.
So the number of coefficients that should correspond to the number of neurons plus one.
However, when you look at the size of the coefficients, you only get the number of neurons.
So where is the intercept term?
Where is the beta zero term?
It turns out that the scikit learn logistic regression function does not store the beta value with the
rest of the coefficients.
It stores it separately in large reg.
I can show you that that is just the object variable name that I had for this logistic regression.
So log reg dot intercept.
And that is one number that is beta zero.
And these are betas one through k.
So I forgot to mention that in the previous video.
So now you get that information here.
Okay.
So now uh yeah I want to look at uh where we get these, uh, zero value beta coefficients from.
So the question is, why does the model set a given neurons coefficient to zero and not a different
neuron?
So you might think that it has to do with the effect size.
For example, if a neuron just doesn't differentiate between the two categories, then it makes sense
that its beta value should get pushed to zero.
That can happen if you're working with data.
Where there is, there are neurons that have some predictability and other neurons that have really
no predictability in terms of the category label.
But that's not necessarily what happens.
So this is the image that you saw in the slides.
And basically what you see here is all of these circles here, these red circles, these correspond
to the neurons that had their beta coefficients switched to zero resulting from the L1 regularization.
And the fact that these are broadly distributed across the y axis, across basically the entire range
of effect size tells you that this is unrelated to the effect size.
It is not the case that the neurons with the smallest effect size, or the smallest ability to differentiate
the two labels get a zero valued coefficient.
So now let me just briefly tell you about this Cohen's d.
It is defined as the average of one category minus the average of the other category.
That's in the numerator.
And in the denominator is the pooled standard deviations across all the categories.
So standard deviation for category one standard deviation for category two.
Add those together.
Divide by two.
And then Cohen's d is literally just the ratio of that.
By the way this is a different Cohen from me different guy different family.
But he has a good name okay.
And what does this mean visually.
Intuitively Cohen's d is basically just the separability of these two distributions for the two different
categories.
So the numerator is this average minus this average.
And the denominator is this width plus this width.
And then divided by two.
So you can think of Cohen's d as how separable these two distributions are from each other.
So that means that when Cohen's d is small when it's close to zero then the neuron is really not differentiating
between the two categories okay.
So the point here is that even neurons with very large effect sizes can still have their betas switched
to zero.
So what is going on here?
So what I do to explore this a bit further is find the neuron.
Find the variable that has the smallest beta coefficient.
Looks like it'll be this one.
And the largest beta coefficient which looks like it will be this one.
And then I plot their histograms.
And that you see here.
So this is the question I posed in the slides.
How is it possible that you get a negative regression coefficient?
Although the direction of the effect is positive right.
So we have label one is greater than label zero.
And yet the beta term is negative.
Well let's see what happens when we run another regression.
So now I'm doing the same regression as I did above.
Except now there's no L1 regularization.
And the data are just I call this extreme data.
These data are just from these two variables, these two neurons.
And now we see that there are both positive and they are both fairly large.
So much larger.
These beta values are orders of magnitude larger than they are here.
Okay.
So what is going on here.
The thing to keep in mind is that a logistic regression with lots of variables is not trying to predict
the importance of each individual variable.
Instead, it is trying to gather all of the data unmasked so all the aggregated data, and try to predict
the label.
So it's not about the neurons, it's not about the variables, it's about the labels.
And so basically the regression looks at all of these data.
And it says you know what.
This is way too much for me to deal with.
I do not actually need all of these data.
So I'm going to ignore half of the data because yeah, half of the data is not contributing anything.
So it kind of balances out the full data set.
So half the data get weighed negatively, half the data roughly get weighed positively.
And the net result is that the model can still make really accurate predictions of the labels, just
because it has so much data from so many variables.
There's so much information that a lot of it has to be balanced and suppressed.
And that's what happens with gradient descent basically.
Okay.
So yeah.
So then the last thing I want to show is, uh, not the last thing.
This is further expanding on this.
So here I'm showing the correlation between these two, uh, neurons.
So the smallest beta value and the largest beta value here you can see that they are on mass strongly
correlated with each other because each one shows a significant difference, uh, a really large effect
size, a difference between category one and category two.
So when you would correlate across these two neurons, you actually get a really strong positive correlation
that would look like this.
Although if you would, you know, ignore all of these data, then these neurons are uncorrelated with
each other.
And if you ignore these data, then the neurons are uncorrelated with each other.
Here.
This is related to something called Simpson's paradox or the subgroups correlation paradox, which I've
mentioned earlier in this course, and you may have learned about Simpson's paradox in another statistics
or machine learning course.
But basically, when the logistic regression model sees these data all together pooled together, then
their collective effect is that they provide a lot of redundant information about the label.
So therefore the model doesn't really need both of them.
So it's going to suppress one of them.
And at the limit of suppression it turns it into a zero coefficient.
Okay.
So yeah.
Then I did another little exploration here where I looked at the variance of the data.
So what I'm doing here is calculating the variance of the data for the neurons with non-zero coefficients
in blue and zero coefficients in red.
This is basically the same analysis as the Cohen's d effect size plot that I showed above, Of uh,
but yeah, with variants instead.
So you do see, there is in general a strong relationship between the variability in a neuron and the
beta coefficient.
But that doesn't explain why the neurons here get switched to zero.
It does help us understand why some of the neurons get negative beta coefficients.
Basically they are less variable.
So they're contributing less to the global information.
And so therefore the model just decides to suppress them and ignore them by giving a negative beta value.
Uh, here I also wanted to show some correlations to show that the distribution of correlations across
the different neurons is basically identical.
It doesn't matter whether the beta coefficients are zero or non-zero.
The reason why this should not be surprising is that I generated these data as completely random numbers.
I hope you are not dissuaded from using logistic regression for LMS and circuit based analyses.
This method is quite powerful and can be quite insightful, but it is tricky when you're working with
very large data sets.
You just have to make sure you're using and interpreting the regression in an appropriate way, and
keeping in mind that the goal of the logistic regression is to predict the label, and not necessarily
to facilitate meaningful inferences about individual beta coefficients.
It's also generally a good idea, when possible, to have a smaller number of variables, so a smaller
number of neurons in the analysis.
For example, you could select neurons based on exhibiting some other statistical properties or their
relation to token features.
On the other hand, data selection also leads to its own can of worms and potential for biases or misspecifications.